Self led DCP tutorial (#485)
HumanCellAtlas/dcp: DCP_Tutorial.md

## DCP Demo (self-led)
**Target Audience:** DCP Staff

**Purpose:** Serve as a learning resource for end-to-end data flow in the DCP

**Components:** Ingest, Upload, Data store, Data pipelines/Analysis, Azul, Data Portal, Matrix

**Reference Document:** https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-9k9tcuIc4aTuxIo-KAT34R_OSca0j9_3LDNJwqksBQ/edit#heading=h.kuwifzq1d62x.

**Note:** This document was published in June 2018 so may have inconsistencies and steps missing. A v2 document will be published soon and linked here.)

### FAQ
**Who do I contact if I encounter any any issues while following the steps?**
Feel free reach out to #dcp-ops-help, create an issue in the DCP repository, or ping Parth.

**Do I need to have a certain level of technical proficiency to follow the steps?**
Technical proficiency should not be a requirement. Please reach out if you encounter any issues, as this indicates that the instructions need additions or modifications.

**How can I make edits to this document?**
Please create a PR in the DCP repository.

> 

Reviewer: Suggesting making the encouragement even stronger to improve the doc,

Author: Removed Please and moved to top of FAQ

**Can I run this in production?**
No. Please follow the instructions and only utilize the staging environment.

**Will this project be available at tracker.staging.data.humancellatlas.org?**
No. The tracker ignores all test projects in order to not overload the view.

**What ids do I need to keep track of?**
Submission ID, Project UUID, Primary Bundle UUID, Primary Bundle FQID, Workflow UUID, Analysis Bundle UUID, Analysis Bundle FQID. These will be defined as a part of the demo.

### Demo
**Requirements**
```
    # python version >= 3.6

    # Run the command in terminal app of your choice
    pip install hca --upgrade
    open ~/.config/hca/config.json
    # In the config file, update "swagger_url" to point to "https://dss.staging.data.humancellatlas.org/v1/swagger.json"

    # Access to job manager
    # https://job-manager.caas-prod.broadinstitute.org/jobs
    # Contact #dcp-ops-help if you do not see any workflows in this view.

    # Access to ingest UI
    # https://ui.ingest.staging.data.humancellatlas.org
    # Contact #dcp-ops-help if you receive a permission error when logging in.

> ```

Reviewer: Suggest having them install in a virtualenv

Author: Will add

#### Phase 1: Primary submission preparation
**Components:** Ingest, Upload  
**Description:** In this phase, you will be uploading a spreadsheet through the ingest UI in order to create a submission. Then, you will utilize the HCA cli to upload the data files for the submission. Both ingest and upload are currently running in AWS infrastructure.

> 1) Please download a spreadsheet found at https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/metadata-schema/tree/master/infrastructure_testing_files/current. These are test spreadsheets that are run through the DCP wide integration tests. Feel free to choose any of the options (Currently smart-seq-2/ss2 and 10x/optimus spreadsheets are available).

Reviewer 2: Since the tutorial is using the staging environment, I think we want to use the test spreadsheet from the staging branch: https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/metadata-schema/tree/staging/infrastructure_testing_files/current

Author: Good catch!

3) Lets go ahead and download the bundle using the HCA cli. This step will download the bundle into a directory named after bundle UUID.
        hca dss download --bundle-uuid {BUNDLE_UUID_FROM_STEP_2) --replica {AWS OR GCP}
4) Go ahead and open up some of the files in the directory. You should notice that these metadata files have values tracing all the way back to the spreadsheet. The structure of the metadata files is defined by the schema as found at https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/metadata-schema.

#### Phase 3: Analysis
**Components:** Analysis, Data Store, Ingest, Upload  
**Description:** In this phase, you will be taking a look at the analysis workflow corresponding with your bundle. You will follow the workflow as it completes and deposits the analysis result back into the data store via Ingest/Upload. Analysis is currently running workflows via cromwell in GCP infrastructure.
1) Go back to your submission in the Ingest UI and copy the `Project UUID` from the `Overview` tab.

> 2) Now replace the project uuid in the URL and visit the Job Manager UI at https://job-manager.caas-prod.broadinstitute.org/jobs?q=project_uuid%3D{PROJECT_UUID_FROM_ABOVE_STEP}. You should now see a workflow running corresponding with your bundle.  The data pipelines component maintains a subscription to the data store in order to trigger workflows. When a bundle is synced in GCP that meets the query, the data store notifies the analysis component. The rules of the subcription are based on metadata fields that are currently supported by production pipelines (factors like species, library construction approaches (10x/ss2), etc). The current subscriptions can be found at https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/lira/tree/master/subscription/elasticsearch_queries.

Reviewer 3: Note: you won't be able to see anything on https://job-manager.caas-prod.broadinstitute.org/jobs?q=project_uuid%3D{PROJECT_UUID_FROM_ABOVE_STEP} unless you have registered on Terra and send your user email to analysis to be whitelisted. Currently, the process is documented briefly here: https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/secondary-analysis/issues/237 But we will create a better doc for that later soon.

Author: Sounds good. I have a little section in the Requirements doc on how to request access. We can link your doc once its up

Author: @rexwangcc in the meantime, I've pointed people to ask for access in #dcp-ops-help

Author: I've updated instructions to point to the ticket to get access to the job manager

    fqids = [hit['bundle_fqid'] for hit in client.post_search.iterate(replica=replica, es_query=query)]
    assert len(fqids) == resp['total_hits']
    return fqids

if __name__ == "__main__":
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description=__doc__)
    parser.add_argument("--replica", default="aws", choices=["aws", "gcp"])
    parser.add_argument("--primary-bundle-uuid")
    args = parser.parse_args()
    dss_client = DSSClient(swagger_url=f"https://dss.staging.data.humancellatlas.org/v1/swagger.json")
    find_secondary_bundle_fqids(dss_client, args.replica, args.primary_bundle_uuid)
```
5) Lets go ahead and download the analysis bundle using the HCA cli. This step will download the bundle into a directory named after bundle UUID.
        hca dss download --bundle-uuid {BUNDLE_UUID_PRINTED_FROM_SCRIPT) --replica {AWS OR GCP}
6) Go ahead and open up some of the files in the directory to get a feel for what is contained within an analysis bundle, including an individual gene x cell matrix.

#### Phase 4: Viewing project in the Browser
**Components:** Data Store, Azul, Data Browser  
**Description:** In this phase, you will be looking at your project in the data browser!

> 1) This is more of an informational step. Just as analysis has a subscription to the data store, azul (the browser backend) has a subcription to all bundles in the data store. Azul will then do a partial download of the bundle and index it based on the facets that are made available for search and exploration in the data browser.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1) This is more of an informational step. Just as Analysis has a subscription to the Data Store, Azul (the Data Browser backend service) has a subscription to all bundles in the Data Store. When Azul is notified about a new bundle, it will do a download of the metadata in the bundle and index it based on the facets that are made available for search and exploration in the Data Browser.
```

Author: Accepting suggestion. Thanks!

> 2) Replace the project UUID in the url and browse your project at `https://staging.data.humancellatlas.org/explore/projects/{YOUR_PROJECT_UUID}`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2) Replace the project UUID in the URL and browse your project at `https://staging.data.humancellatlas.org/explore/projects/{YOUR_PROJECT_UUID}`
```

Author: Accepting suggestion. Thanks!
